We have seen that light or more generally, electromagnetic radiation interactions seem to behave like
waves, not as tiny particles, that is point like particles.
This was the state of the art knowledge until the end of the 19th century.
Newton's like particle theory first somehow in disgrace and was degraded to a historical curiosity.
But beginning from the 20th century, as time went by, new experiments and the great insights of many
physicists indicated that this could not be the whole story.
In fact, about the end of the 19th century, physicists had to tackle with a very ugly and uncomfortable
problem.
The question was why?
And according to which principles, two hot bodies radiate heat.
The answer that classical physics stubbornly gave was totally unacceptable, according according to
classical physics, every object which is not frozen at the chilling absolute zero temperature must
radiate, radiate an infinite amount of heat in form of electromagnetic waves.
For example, according to quantum physics, which rests on classical premises, even a block of ice,
which is not frozen down to a temperature of minus 273 point one five Celsius.
That is absolutely absolute zero.
Even if it is, say, even only one degree above this limit, then it must emit an infinite energy and
destroy the entire universe in a catastrophic explosion.
This was what classical physics was continuously, continuously suggesting.
Every attempt of the best minds of the time led them to calculations and formulas for the emitted energy
of a body at Fenet, but non-zero temperature that inevitably always diverged.
That is, which showed to tend to infinity for a long time.
There seemed to be no way around this absurd conclusion.
Such kind of paradox is what the famous philosopher of science, Thomas Kuhn, called an anomaly that
is a violation of the paradigm induced expectations that govern, govern normal science.
Or to put it in simple terms, the current theories predict something very different, eventually even
paradoxical, and which does not match with reality.
And eventually, it seems, also not to make any sense.
The solution of this problem marked historically the advent of modern quantum theory in the last century.
It was Max Planck, a German physicist, who about nineteen or five beautifully resolved the enigma
and is considered for this reason.
The father, the father of quantum physics.
Let us analyze in more detail what this was all about.
Consider a very hot magma from a volcano, for example, or in any case, more molten stones and rocks
at high temperature as well known above some temperature, typically over several hundreds of degrees
Celsius.
Rocks begin to melt and become reddish.
They emit red color radiation, which means that they emit electromagnetic waves at a wavelength or
if you prefer, prefer a frequency that is visible to the human eye.
The emitted the emitted electromagnetic waves, however, become invisible to us when the same rocks
have a lower temperature, say, about 20 degrees or twenty seven degrees Celsius.
The so-called room temperatures, this makes it clear that there must be a relation between the temperature
of the body and the amount and frequency of the electromagnetic radiation it emits, which means the
color it displays.
Something similar can be said for lightning or the light emitted by the flame of candles.
What happens in this case, in the first case is that there is an electric electric discharge which
suddenly heats up the air extremely quickly to thousands of degrees.
Or like in the case of a candle, there is a chemical reaction which heats up the surrounding air.
We have a different substance with different temperatures, but again, we may ask it's the same relation
between the colors that is the wavelength of the emitted electromagnetic waves and the temperature still
holds.
Another example is the case of a very hot metal at room temperatures, it does not emit any visible
radiation.
We will not be able to see it in the darkness with our eyes only.
I mean, but if we heat up a piece of iron at several hundreds of degrees, then it will become visible
also in the dark, emitting emitting first reddish radiation.
And by increasing the temperature, it will become bluish and finally emit white radiation.
But all this does not only happen in the visible domain domain of light, the truth is that every object
and even our own bodies emit also radiation at room temperature.
This radiation is not visible to the human eye, but exists nevertheless, for example, in the infrared
domain.
This can nicely visualized with the typical infrared images we are nowadays accustomed to see from especially
from the military night vision helmets that modern soldiers wear.
Infrared images can be acquired with special imaging video or CCD cameras, which are sensitive also
to other wavelength.
Then those human eye, the human eye perceives in this figure.
Here you can see the head of a boy in perfect darkness.
It becomes clear that our bodies emit electromagnetic waves, as LEMS do.
We are just a sort of lamp in the infrared domain.
However, it is not visible in light.
Would our eyes be sensitive to the infrared radiation as indeed some species of snakes, fishes and
mosquitoes are?
We could easily see how even in perfect darkness we can.
We can see the object, we could see the objects around us and they would appear to us as glowing.
More generally, we can say that every object that has a non-zero absolute temperature emits some amount
of radiation only in the case of a very extreme case where we would freeze it down to the absolute absolute
zero temperature of zero kelvin to a temperature of about minus two hundred seventy three point fifteen
degrees Celsius, which, by the way, is also a purely ideal case that, as we shall see later, is
forbidden by the laws of quantum mechanics.
Then it would no longer emit any radiation.
But apart from that extreme case, everything emits some sort of heat in form of electromagnetic radiation
on all wavelengths.
It becomes reasonably reasonable then to assume that there must be some relation between the temperature
of the body, the wavelength lamda of the electromagnetic wave it emits and the intensity of the of
that radiation.
To find out what this relation must be and what principles and phenomena stand behind the production
of this radiation at microscopic scale, I mean, at the molecular and atomic scale, physicists reasoned
in terms of the so-called black body model and which was and sounds as follows.
Consider an empty body with a tiny hole hole in it.
That is a cavity where we inject a beam of electromagnetic waves through that tiny aperture.
Moreover, consider the walls inside this cavity is quite good, but not perfect reflectors so that
light rays once in the cavity bounce back and forth many times distributing, distributing themselves
homogeneously and yet can be absorbed sooner or later without finding their way out back through the
small hole.
This implies that all the radiation remains trapped inside the cavity and finally gets absorbed by the
material, which makes up the containing walls.
In other words, it is a perfectly black body since it absorbs all the radiation but is not but does
not remit it.
Back in physics, a black body is by definition a body that absorbs all the radiation.
Technically, technically, one says it has a unitary absorb absorption coefficient and it does so at
every wavelength and at every temperature.
And this independently from the substance or form and structure of the of the absorbing cavity or body.
This is, of course, only a very idealised model, since no real material object is a perfect absorber.
But this kind of model is a good approximation for most cases of interest.
The next step is to consider the cavity in stationary conditions and in thermodynamic equilibrium with
the environment, which means that it must not change its temperature, tea or other physical parameters
in time.
If this condition is met, we can assume that the thermal electromagnetic radiation trapped inside the
cavity will quickly distribute itself homogeneously, making the enclosure's temperature uniform throughout
its structure.
The system can therefore be characterized by its energy density, that is the amount of energy per unit
volume independent of its temperature and wavelength, which do not depend from the shape, material
or form and structure of the body.
The energy lost through the tiny hole can be considered negligible or eventually can be replaced.
Keeping the radiation energy density inside constant by injecting the same amount of energy from time
to time as a cavity emits.
The China purchase emission can also be used to look into the cavity without perturbing the system,
and by doing so it reveals as the wavelength and intensity of the radiation it contains inside.
At this point, it becomes clear why every material object in thermal equilibrium with them back with
the environment can, despite a somewhat misleading terminology, be considered as a black body in this
context?
This should not be confused with the color or brightness of an object, because, for example, also
the sun can be considered a black body in the sense physicists mean, since it is an object which maintains
its temperature over a long period of time and the energy which is emitted into outer space is replaced
by the energy it produces in its inner core.
Physicists of the 19th 19th century consider the BlackBerry radiation cavity as a model that was supposed
to describe, describe appropriately the electromagnetic energy content of any physical body with infinite
temperature.
The step from a qualitative to a more quantitative approach, which could describe with the formula
the intensity of the electromagnetic radiation emitted by a body in function of its temperature t and
wavelength the wavelength lambda or or equivalently its color and the visible domain considered the
energy density of radiation per unit frequency, interval and unit volume.
So this energy density function is defined as something that depends on the frequency and gives a number
and energy density for each frequency and in a specific position and unit volume inside the cavity.
This radiation, when in a stationary state, was modeled with what physicists call stationary or standing
waves.
These behave like electromagnetic waves in a box which are reflected back and forth and which do not
interfere with each other destructively, building, oscillating, but stable with structures inside
this box, standing waves are precisely all those that have only the wavelength that match the cavity
walls with that zero amplitude as shown in this figure.
As an allergy.
Think of swinging a rod fixed at the wall eventually.
Try this by yourself.
This experiment, fix the rod at the wall and on the other extreme, swing it up and down, producing
a mechanical perturbation that propagates along the rod and which will be reflected from the wall.
The reflected wave will interfere with the incoming one and into interference phenomena will occur.
What you will easily discover is that only for some precise oscillation frequencies, you will be able
to create a stable oscillation pattern.
Therefore, standing waist can exist only at specific wavelengths called Mode's, only at these Moad
frequencies, they interfere with itself constructively.
For other frequencies, one observes disordered oscillations.
So not every kind of electromagnetic waves can be contained in a cavity in stationary mode, but only
those which match the right frequencies.
Another way to experience this is by playing with the slinky, the Helliker metallic spring, the toy
you certainly have played with sooner or later in your young age.
And this is what I will show you now with this little presentation video.
Here I have the famous Slinky, which is just a helical spring, but it is a toy I think that everyone
has played with sooner or later and I continue to do this often also as an adult, I like it very much.
And this object lends itself very well to illustrate the nature of waves.
In this case, of course, we have mechanical waves.
First of all, we must distinguish between transverse and longitudinal waves.
Transverse waves are waves which oscillate perpendicular to the direction of motion.
Yeah, so something like that.
The direction of motion is back and forth, but the oscillation, the perturbation into this Hilik helical
spring is perpendicular to the direction of motion.
So can you like that?
You see?
It goes back and forth, but the oscillation is perpendicular.
This is a typical transverse wavves with a transverse wave is characterized by also a polarization plane,
that is, it can oscillate.
In different directions, which means that I see something like that is a vertical direction, vertical
polarisation or.
This year.
Is horizontal paralyzation something in between could be diagonal polarisation or whatever kind of polarization,
you can rotate the plane of polarization, of this transversal transverse wave and particularly important
for our purposes where we will deal with light, light has also rotational polarization.
It can the polarization plain of the electric or magnetic field can rotate in time.
So it is not stable and remains always vertical or always horizontal, but it is able to well, to vary
in time, obviously clockwise or anticlockwise, one or the other.
Then the other kind of wave that you can have is the longitudinal wave to the waves.
Do not oscillate perpendicular to the direction of motion, but with the direction of motion that the
perturbation, the oscillatory perturbation moves in the direction of propagation parallel to it.
Well, OK, let's see.
This means that it is not this kind of wave.
Now it is.
This kind of way, I don't know if you see it in the video, I'd give it a kick.
You see, it goes back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
All right, let's do it another time.
Uh, stop it.
So and then and now there's a little transverse wave.
Wait until it's damped out.
So and then I give it a kick duck.
And.
And another one, you see.
This is a typical longitudinal wave.
These kind of waves are characterized, characterized by the fact that the perturbation moves.
Along the same direction of propagations, the typical example of longitudinal waves are, for example,
sound waves or more generally pressure waves.
They do not have polarization, but sound waves, for example, are just pressure compression and decompression
compression, decompression wave wave like in the air and they are of this current era.
They move, they perturb the medium with a wave pressure along the direction of propagation so we can
have two possible kind of waves, the transverse waves and longitudinal waves, transverse waves with
the polarization we will have to do to deal with mainly mainly with transverse waves, because electromagnetic
waves are transverse waves.
So I but just for completeness, I gave you also some impressions about the longitudinal waves.
So let us come to the point of this lecture of the body radiation here.
What is really important to understand is a concept of the standing wave, standing waves and nothing
else, then also an interference phenomena.
Yeah, they.
Can exist because of an interference phenomenon.
Let us see how one can illustrate this with a slinky again, take one part here.
Keep it fixed.
I try to keep it fixed as much as I can.
It's not easy to remain perfectly still to fixate on a point in the air here, but then I give OK,
here I give this.
Kick and you have.
The usual transverse wave, but if I continue, yes, you see already we have a standing wave, but
I wanted to get the first mode, so I must decrease the frequency with one mode.
It's not easy to find exactly.
The right frequency here.
Here you have it, you have it now.
Yes, this is the first standing.
Mode for standing wave mode.
Just a peek going up and down.
If I increase the frequency, let me see.
So first it becomes messy, it becomes quite messy.
You must insist a bit.
And then it's stable, like, no, no, this is already the third mode.
And then so here we have, uh.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
The second mode.
Two peaks and valleys.
What happens here.
Is that the.
Perturbation and goes back and forth.
Interferes with the other coming perturbation first a bit and the waves that comes back that is reflected
at this site interferes with the wave that is coming from this side.
And that's if you find the right frequency, you will get a standing wave.
If the frequency is not correct, then it becomes messy.
So now let me see if I get also this is the third mode.
So this was the second mode, OK, I would say this is the third mode, one, two, three peaks and
valleys, the polarization here is somewhat diagonal.
I don't know if you see the in the video, but OK, so let me see if I get also the fourth mode.
Yes, but it is a bit messy.
So you see, you need for higher frequencies to get higher modes.
You need a very stable input in amplitude and frequency, especially in frequency, I think.
But you see, this is a nice way to illustrate the nature of waves.
And we will find this more over and over again.
What is really important now at this point is the concept of wave as a sign or cosine curve.
It has an amplitude.
It has a wave length lambda, it has a frequency, it can have a polarisation if it is transverse waves.
And in our case, we will meet them again as electromagnetic waves and the notion of the standing wave
because see what is a standing wave, it is nothing else as an another interference phenomena, because
what happens is that the ingoing wave interferes with the reflected wave.
Yeah, it's nothing else is an interference phenomena on well, in another physical set, one wave goes
in, one wave goes out, they interfere.
And when they construct when when they interfere constructively, then we have a standing wave.
But to do this must have a precise frequency.
Some frequencies work, some others do not.
And when they work, you have the standing wave standing.
Moat's the first, second and higher modes.
And that's what is of paramount importance to understand generally all these concepts and notions,
because you will have to deal with this with this again.
Remember, I can already tell you in advance atoms and nothing else as.
Standing probability waves, if you don't understand what this means now, we will deal with this later.
Having a better idea now of what standing waves are, it is not too difficult to see that even if we
take into account only a discrete number of possible modes in the cavity, still an infinite number
of such modes can fit between the walls.
In this figure and simulation, only the first six modes are shown, but in principle there is no upper
limit.
The mode no end can become virtually as large as we wish.
If we approach an infinite infinitely more wavelength that is an infinitely high frequency, we can
in principle accommodate an infinite, infinite number of modes.
Therefore, the problem with this model is that in classical mechanics, there is no reason to assume
that one electromagnetic mode should be considered more privileged than the others.
This means that if we wait long enough, that is we wait wait until the system is in thermodynamic equilibrium.
The energy will be exchanged and distributed among all the modes equally until they will finally attain
the same average energy.
There is no reason to believe that one mode should oscillate with more energy than the other.
That means with more amplitude, the cavities, energy content should be distributed equally all over
all the modes.
This is what stage the classical equi partition theorem.
These modes interact also with the particles of the wall of the enclosure or with those within its volume.
The particles making up.
The container can be seen as many little springs which oscillate with a different frequency, so-called
harmonic oscillators in which absorb and remit the most energy.
Continuously.
In fact, it is through the repeated absorption and emission front and back to the molds that this energy
exchange among the molds itself can occur, then it seems reasonable to assume that this equilibrium
mean energy of the modes depends from the amount of the body's thermal energy and which in turn is determined
by its temperature.
In this picture, each mode can in principle oscillate within any conceivable energy.
There is no upper or lower bound, and there is no reason to believe that any value in between could
be considered to be forbidden.
Therefore, as tiny, this average oscillation energy might be if the cavity is supposed to contain
an infinite number of modes, since there is no upper limit to the frequency and mode can acquire.
Each with the same small but non-zero energy, then we are forced to conclude that then the committee
as a whole contains an infinite energy.
So clearly, something must have gone wrong here, but even though this results seemed immediately implausible,
nobody knew for sure how to tackle with it.
As long as Max Planck didn't find the way out to this dilemma, the best model of the time for the black
body radiation was that drive by a lot, really, and jeans in nineteen hundred and which is known as
Ryley Jeans Law, it clearly displays what is called the ultraviolet catastrophe.
The energy density of the radiation of a black body, a temperature t diverges at high frequencies.
It was called ultraviolet.
Since the ultraviolet light makes part of the upper frequency spectrum of light and where the energy
and the frequency tends to diverge, this depressing state of affairs lasted until nine until nine 05
when Max Planck came to rescue.
We will see in the next lecture how he could avoid catastrophes and so to speak, reestablish law and
order in physics.